# Trust and Turnout: A Network Approach to Understanding the Role of Social and Political Trust in Voter Participation

We examined the potential interplay of social and political trust in influencing voters’ decisions. We estimated a Mixed Graphical Model (mgm) to investigate which trust items are the best predictors for voter turnout in the Netherlands (N = 1695) using ten trust elements from the open-source European Social Dataset (ESS ERIC, 2024). Firstly, we assessed the structure of the estimated network to see whether it aligns with the types of trust identified by the literature (social vs. political) and how these clusters interact. Secondly, we evaluated the connectivity of the network and the most central nodes to gain insights into the overall predictive ability of the model and the most useful variables to predict voter turnout. The visual inspection revealed that items are clustered around their respective concept, with distinct clusters showing social trust and political trust. While the estimated edges showed that only one social trust item is significant in predicting voter turnout, the cluster structure emphasised that the trust items are in a positive reinforcing relationship with each other. This indicates that targeting social trust generally could potentially increase election participation. The highly connected clusters align with the overall networks’ high global connectivity. Since highly connected networks serve as better predictors of political outcomes, such as voting behaviour (Dalege et al., 2017), the present network model appears suitable for analysing trust’s influence on voter turnout. To assess which item in the network has the biggest impact on voting, we assessed node-centrality. Since the closeness centrality was not stable, an interpretation of centrality in line with Dalege et al. (2017) was not possible.
